---
layout: episode
title: "Good practice using version control"
teaching: 15
exercises: 0
questions:
- "What is good practice using version control?"
- "What are the caveats of being messy using version control?"
objectives:
- "Know how to name repositories."
- "Understand when to create a branch."
keypoints:
-   "Good practice using version control:"
permalink: /version-control-good-practice/
---

The following guidelines for working with version control are used by software development teams working at [Manaaki Whenua - Landcare Research](https://www.landcareresearch.co.nz/home) in Aotearoa, New Zealand.

## Repository Names

Paying attention to giving a repository a good name is crucial to keep the list of repositories tidy and searchable.

* The name will be lower case (including acronyms).
* Use hyphens to separate words.
* If there are multiple repositories for a system then use a prefix to group the repositories together. It is also possible to use the projects feature in Bitbucket to group the repositories.
* Try and keep the names short but meaningful (a readme.md is also required).
* Be consistent and follow the patterns that the existing repositories exhibit.

## Readme File

The readme.md file is a special file that uses markdown to create a home page for the repository. It is very useful to give an overview of the following details.

1. What does the project do? Share the need that the project is trying to meet. 

2. Some basic metadata like the names of the project sponsors, technologies used, etc.

3. How is it set up? If someone were to pick up your codebase today how would they get everything running in their local environment.

4. How is it used? Once it’s up and running provide some very descriptive examples of usage.

5. Is it in good shape? Do you have code climate, Teamcity build widgets, or other tools running to indicate the health of the project? Include information on dependencies as well.

6. License information. If this is important then it should be stated in the readme.

7. Links to other details. E.g. JIRA and Confluence for more documentation.

Some useful best practices are outlined in the following web page.

https://github.com/jehna/readme-best-practices

## Gitignore File

The .gitignore file is another special file that contains rules to tell git which files in the repository to ignore, for example build artifacts.

A useful collection of .gitignore files for different languages and environments can be found [here](https://github.com/github/gitignore).

### Some examples of things not to track

* Project binaries (DLLs, PDB) - e.g. for Visual Studio anything in \bin, \obj, etc.
* Project databases (App_Data)
* Log files
* Temporary test files unless they are part of a testing process
* Extremely large media files (Git providers usually have some hard limits on repository sizes)
* User settings (.user, .suo, etc.)
* NuGet packages (anything in the \packages folder)
* **Sensitive configuration details such as passwords, keys, etc.**

## Comments and Commit Messages

There are many opinions about writing useful commit messages but the following few tips are useful to help make them consistent.

* Write your commit message in the imperative: "Fix bug" and not "Fixed bug" or "Fixes bug." This convention matches up with commit messages generated by commands like git merge and git revert.
* Keep the first line short so that it acts as a title to the message (also capitalise the first word in the title). This is useful in tools where there are many comments in a list such as the commit log.
* Separate the body of the message with a blank line.
* Use the body to explain what and why, not how.
* Where possible link to JIRA issues for more detail.
* In general follow in guidelines from the [Pro Git book](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2).

A longer explanation can be found on this [blog post](http://chris.beams.io/posts/git-commit/).
